I here do die.
So shaken as we are, so wan with care,
find we a time for frighted peace to pant
and breathe short-winded accents of new broils
to be commenced in strands afar remote.
No more the thirsty entrance of this soil
shall daub her lips with her own children's blood.
Nor more shall trenching war channel her fields,
nor bruise her flowerets
with the armed hoofs of hostile paces.
Those opposed eyes,
which, like the meteors of a troubled heaven,
all of one nature, of one substance bred,
did lately meet in the intestine shock
and furious close of civil butchery shall now,
in mutual, well-beseeming ranks, march all one way
and be no more opposed
against acquaintance, kindred, and allies.
The edge of war, like an ill-sheathed knife,
no more shall cut his master.
Therefore, friends, as far as to the sepulchre of Christ,
whose soldier now, under whose blessed cross
we are impressed and engaged to fight,
forthwith a power of English shall we levy,
whose arms were moulded in their mothers' womb
to chase these pagans in those holy fields
over whose acres walk'd those blessed feet
which fourteen hundred years ago were nail'd for our advantage
on the bitter cross.
But this our purpose now is twelve month old,
and bootless 'tis to tell you we will go.
Therefore, we meet not now.
Then let me hear of you, my gentle cousin Westmoreland,
what yesternight our council did decree
in forwarding this dear expedience.
My liege, this haste was hot in question,
and many limits of the charge set down but yesternight
when all athwart there came a post from Wales
loaden with heavy news,
whose worst was that the noble Mortimer,
leading the men of Herefordshire to fight
against the irregular and wild Glendower,
was by the rude hands of that Welshman taken,
a thousand of his people butchered,
upon whose dead corpse there was such misuse,
such shameless, beastly transformation
by those Welshwomen done
as may not be without much shame retold or spoken of.
It seems then that the tidings of this broil
brake off our business for the Holy Land.
This match'd with other did, my gracious lord,
for more uneven and unwelcome news came
from the north and thus it did import.
On Holy-rood day, the gallant Hotspur there,
Young Harry Percy, and brave Archibald,
that ever-valiant and approved Scot,
at Holmedon met,
where they did spend a sad and bloody hour,
as by discharge of their artillery
and shape of likelihood, the news was told.
For he that brought them, in the very heat
and pride of their contention did take horse,
uncertain of the issue any way.
Here is a dear, a true industrious friend,
Sir Walter Blunt, new lighted from his horse.
Stain'd with the variation of each soil
betwixt that Holmedon and this seat of ours.
And he hath brought us smooth and welcome news.
The Earl of Douglas is discomfited.
Ten thousand bold Scots, two and twenty knights,
balk'd in their own blood did Sir Walter see
on Holmedon's plains.
Of prisoners, Hotspur took Mordake, Earl of Fife,
and eldest son to beaten Douglas,
and the Earl of Athol, of Murray, Angus, and Menteith.
And is not this an honorable spoil?
A gallant prize?
Ha, cousin, is it not?
Indeed, it is a conquest for a prince to boast of.
Yea, there thou makest me sad and makest me sin in envy
that my Lord Northumberland should be the father
to so blest a son,
a son who is the theme of honor's tongue.
Amongst a grove, the very straightest plant,
who is sweet Fortune's minion and her pride,
whilst I, by looking on the praise of him,
see riot and dishonor stain the brow of my young Harry.
O that it could be proved that some night-tripping fairy
had in cradle-clothes exchanged our children where they lay
and call'd mine Percy, his Plantagenet!
Then would I have his Harry and he mine.
But let him from my thoughts.
What think you, coz, of this young Percy's pride?
The prisoners which he in this adventure hath surprised
to his own use, he keeps and sends me word
I shall have none but Mordake Earl of Fife.
This is his uncle's teaching.
This is Worcester, malevolent to you in all aspects,
which makes him prune himself, and bristle up
the crest of youth against your dignity.
But I have sent for him to answer this.
And for this cause awhile we must neglect
our holy purpose to Jerusalem.
Cousin, on Wednesday next,
our council we will hold at Windsor.
So inform the lords.
But come yourself with speed to us again,
for more is to be said and to be done
than out of anger can be uttered.
How now, Hal.
What time of day is it, lad?
Thou art so fat-witted, with drinking of old sack
and unbuttoning thee after supper
and sleeping upon benches after noon,
that thou hast forgotten to demand that truly
which thou wouldst truly know.
What a devil hast thou to do with the time of the day?
Unless hours were cups of sack and minutes capons
and clocks the tongues of bawds
and dials the signs of leaping-houses
and the blessed sun himself a fair hot wench
in flame-colored taffeta,
I see no reason why thou shouldst be so superfluous
to demand the time of the day.
Indeed, you come near me now, Hal,
for we that take purses go by the moon and the seven stars
and not by Phoebus, he,
"that wandering knight so fair."
And I prithee, sweet wag, when thou art king,
as, God save Thy Grace-- or "Majesty," I should say,
for grace thou wilt have none--
What, none?
No, no, by my troth, not so much as will serve
to be prologue to an egg and butter.
Well, how then?
Come, roundly, roundly.
Marry, then, sweet wag, when thou art king,
let not us that are squires of the night's body
be called thieves of the day's beauty.
Let us be called, oh, Diana's foresters,
gentlemen of the shade, minions of the moon.
Thou sayest well, and it holds well too,
for the fortune of us that are the moon's men
doth ebb and flow like the sea,
being governed, as the sea is, by the moon.
As, for proof, now: a purse of gold
most resolutely snatched on Monday night
and most dissolutely spent on Tuesday morning,
now in as low an ebb as the foot of the ladder
and by and by as high a flow as the ridge of the gallows.
By the Lord, thou sayest true, Hal.
But, I prithee, sweet wag, shall there be gallows
standing in England when thou art king
and resolution thus fobbed as it is
with the rusty curb of old father antic the law?
Do not thou, when thou art king, hang a thief.
No, thou shalt.
Shall I?
O rare!
Oh, by the Lord, I'll be a brave judge.
Thou judgest false already.
I mean that thou shalt have the hanging of the thieves
and so become a rare hangman.
Oh, Hal.
Well...
and in some sort, it jumps with my humor
as well as waiting in the court, I can tell you.
For obtaining of suits?
Yea, for obtaining of suits,
whereof the hangman hath no lean wardrobe.
Oh, 'sblood, I'm as melancholy as a gib cat or a lugged bear.
Or an old lion?
Or a lover's lute?
Or the drone of a Lincolnshire bagpipe.
What sayest thou to a hare or the melancholy of Moor-ditch?
Thou hast the most unsavoury similes
and art indeed the most comparative,
rascalliest, sweet young prince.
Oh, I prithee, Hal, trouble me no more with vanity.
I would to God thou and I knew
where a commodity of good names were to be bought.
An old lord of the council rated me the other day
in the street about you, sir, but I marked him not;
And yet he talked very wisely, but I regarded him not.
And yet he talked wisely, and in the street too.
Thou didst well, for wisdom cries out
in the street, and no man regards it.
Ooh, ooh!
Thou hast damnable iteration
and art indeed able to corrupt a saint.
Thou hast done much harm upon me, Hal.
God forgive thee for it.
Before I knew thee, Hal, I knew nothing.
And now am I, if a man were to speak truly,
little better than one of the wicked.
I must give over this life, and I will give it over.
By the Lord, and I do not, I'm a villain.
I'll be damned for never a king's son in Christendom.
Where shall we take a purse tomorrow, Jack?
'Zounds, where thou wilt, lad.
I'll make one.
An I do not, call me villain and baffle me.
I see a good amendment of life in thee--
from praying to purse-taking.
Why, Hal, 'tis my vocation.
'Tis no sin for a man to labor in his vocation.
Poins.
Now shall we know if Peto have set a match.
O, if men were to be saved by merit,
what hole in hell were hot enough for him?
Good morrow, Ned.
Good morrow, sweet Hal.
What says Monsieur Remorse?
What says Sir John Sack and Sugar?
Jack, how agrees the devil and thee about thy soul,
that thou soldest him on Good-Friday last
for a cup of Madeira and a cold capon's leg?
Sir John stands to his word.
He will give the devil his due.
Then art thou damned for keeping thy word with the devil.
Else he had been damned for cozening the devil.
-My lads, my lads. -Yes.
Tomorrow morning, by four o'clock,
early at Gadshill.
There are pilgrims going to Canterbury with rich offerings
and traders riding to London with fat purses.
I have vizards for you all.
You have horses for yourselves.
Peto lies tonight in Rochester.
I have bespoke supper tomorrow night in Eastcheap.
We shall do it as secure as sleep.
If you will go, I will stuff your purses full of crowns.
If you will not, tarry at home and be hanged.
Hear ye, Edward.
If I tarry at home and go not, I'll hang you for going.
You will, chops?
Hal, wilt thou make one?
Who, I, rob?
I, a thief?
Not I, by my faith.
There's neither honesty, manhood, nor good fellowship
in thee, nor thou camest not of the blood royal
if thou darest not stand for ten shillings.
Sir John, I prithee, leave the prince and me alone.
I will lay him down such reasons for this adventure
that he shall go.
Well, God give thee the spirit of persuasion
and him the ears of profiting,
that what thou speakest may move
and what he hears may be believed,
that the true prince may, for recreation sake,
prove a false thief,
for the poor abuses of the time want countenance.
Farewell!
You shall find me in Eastcheap.
Farewell, thou latter spring!
Farewell, all-hallown summer!
Now, my good, sweet honey lord,
ride with us tomorrow.
I have a jest to execute that I cannot manage alone.
Falstaff, Bardolph, and Peto
shall rob those men that we have already waylaid.
Yourself and I shall not be there.
And when they have the booty, if you and I do not rob them,
then cut this head off from my shoulders.
How shall we part with them in setting forth?
Why, we will set forth before or after them.
'Tis like that they will know us by our horses, by our habits,
by every other appointment, to be ourselves.
Tut; our horses, they shall not see.
I'll tie them in the wood.
Our vizards, we will change after we leave them.
And, sirrah, I have cases of buckram for the nonce
to immask our noted outward garments.
Yea, but I doubt they will be too hard for us.
Well, for two of them, I know them to be
as true-bred cowards as ever turned back.
And as for the third, if he fight longer
than he sees reason, I'll forswear arms.
The virtue of this jest shall be
the incomprehensible lies this same fat rogue
will tell,when we meet at supper:
how thirty, at least, he fought with;
what wards, what blows, what extremities he endured.
And in the reproof of this lives the jest.
Well, I will go with thee.
Provide us all things necessary.
Meet me tomorrow night in Eastcheap.
There, I'll sup.
Farewell.
Farewell, my lord.
I know you all
and will a while uphold the unyoked humor
of your idleness.
Yet herein will I imitate the sun,
who doth permit the base, contagious clouds
to smother up his beauty from the world
that, when he please again to be himself,
being wanted, he may be more wonder'd at
by breaking through the foul and ugly mists of vapors
that did seem to strangle him.
If all the year were playing holidays,
to sport would be as tedious as to work.
But when they seldom come, they wish'd for come,
and nothing pleaseth but rare accidents.
So when this loose behavior I throw off
and pay the debt I never promised,
by how much better than my word I am,
by so much shall I falsify men's hopes.
And like bright metal on a sullen ground,
my reformation, glittering o'er my fault,
shall show more goodly and attract more eyes
than that which hath no foil to set it off.
I'll so offend to make offense a skill,
redeeming time when men think least I will.
My blood hath been too cold and temperate,
unapt to stir at these indignities.
And you have found me,
for, accordingly, you tread upon my patience.
But be sure I will from henceforth
rather be myself, mighty and to be fear'd,
than my condition,
which hath been smooth as oil, soft as young down,
and therefore lost that title of respect
which the proud soul ne'er pays but to the proud.
Our house, my sovereign liege, little deserves
the scourge of greatness to be used on it.
And that same greatness too which our own hands
have holp to make so portly.
My lord--
Worcester!
Get thee gone!
For I do see danger and disobedience in thine eye.
Oh, sir, your presence is too bold and peremptory,
and majesty might never yet endure
the moody frontier of a servant brow.
You have good leave to leave us.
When we need your use and counsel,
we shall send for you.
You were about to speak.
Yea, my lord.
Those prisoners in your highness' name demanded,
which Harry Percy here at Holmedon took,
were, as he says, not with such strength denied
as is deliver'd to your majesty.
Either envy, therefore, or misprison
is guilty of this fault and not my son.
My liege, I did deny no prisoners.
But I remember, when the fight was done,
when I was dry with rage and extreme toil,
breathless and faint,leaning upon my sword,
came there a certain lord, neat, and trimly dress'd,
fresh as a bridegroom.
And his chin new reap'd show'd
like a stubble-land at harvest-home.
He was perfumed like a milliner, and 'twixt his finger
and his thumb, he held a pouncet-box,
which ever and anon he gave his nose
and took't away again; who therewith angry,
when it next came there,,took it in snuff.
And still he smiled and talk'd.
And as the soldiers bore dead bodies by,
he call'd them untaught knaves, unmannerly,
to bring a slovenly, unhandsome corse
betwixt the wind and his nobility.
With many holiday, and lady terms, he question'd me.
Amongst the rest,
demanded my prisoners in your majesty's behalf.
I then, all smarting with my wounds being cold,
to be so pester'd with a popinjay,
out of my grief and my impatience
answer'd neglectingly I know not what.
He should or he should not.
For he made me mad to see him shine so brisk
and smell so sweet
and talk so like a waiting-gentlewoman
of guns and drums and wounds.
God save the mark!
And telling me the sovereign'st thing on earth
was parmaceti for an inward bruise.
And that it was great pity, so it was,
this villainous salt-petre should be digg'd out
of the bowels of the harmless earth,
which many a good tall fellow had destroy'd so cowardly.
And but for these vile guns,
he would himself have been a soldier.
This bald unjointed chat of his, my lord,
I answer'd indirectly, as I said.
And I beseech you, let not his report come current
for an accusation betwixt my love and your high majesty.
The circumstance consider'd, good my lord,
whate'er Lord Harry Percy then had said
to such a person and in such a place,
at such a time, and all the rest retold,
may reasonably die and never rise
to do him wrong or any way impeach
what then he said, so he unsay it now.
Why, yet he doth deny his prisoners.
But with proviso and exception,
that we at our own charge shall ransom straight
his brother-in-law, the foolish Mortimer,
who, on my soul, hath wilfully betray'd
the lives of those that he did lead to fight
against that great magician, damn'd Glendower,
whose daughter, as we hear,
that Mortimer hath lately married.
Shall our coffers, then, be emptied
to redeem a traitor home?
Shall we buy treason and indent with fears,
when they have lost and forfeited themselves?
No, on the barren mountains, let him starve,
for I shall never hold that man my friend
whose tongue shall ask me for one penny cost
to ransom home revolted Mortimer.
Revolted Mortimer?
He never did fall off, my sovereign liege,
but by the chance of war
to prove that true needs but one tongue
for all those wounds, those mouthed wounds,
which valiantly he took
when on the gentle Severn's sedgy bank,
in single opposition, hand to hand,
he did confound the best part of an hour
in changing hardiment with great Glendower.
Three times they breathed, and three times did they drink,
upon agreement, of swift Severn's flood,
who then, affrighted with their bloody looks,
ran fearfully among the trembling reeds
and hid his crisp head in the hollow bank,
bloodstained with those valiant combatants!
Never did base and rotten policy color her working
with such deadly wounds.
Nor never could the noble Mortimer receive so many,
and all willingly.
Then let not him be slander'd with revolt!
Thou dost belie him, Percy.
Thou dost belie him.
He never did encounter with Glendower.
I tell thee, he durst as well have met the devil alone
as Owen Glendower for an enemy!
Art thou not ashamed?
But, sirrah, henceforth
let me not hear you speak of Mortimer.
Send me your prisoners with the speediest means,
or you shall hear in such a kind from me
as will displease you.
My Lord Northumberland,
we license your departure with your son.
Send us your prisoners, or you will hear of it.
An if the devil come and roar for them,
I will not send them.
I will after straight and tell him,
for I will ease my heart, albeit I make a hazard of my head.
What, drunk with choler?
Stay and pause awhile.
Here comes your uncle.
Speak of Mortimer!
'Zounds, I will speak of him
and let my soul want mercy if I do not join with him.
Yea, on his part, I'll empty all these veins
and shed my dear blood drop by drop in the dust.
But I will lift the noble Mortimer
as high in the air as this unthankful king,
as this ingrate and canker'd Bolingbroke.
Brother, the king hath made your nephew mad.
Who struck this heat up after I was gone?
He will, forsooth, have all my prisoners.
When I urged the ransom once again of my wife's brother,
then his cheek look'd pale,
and on my face he turn'd an eye of death,
trembling even at the name of Mortimer.
I cannot blame him.
Was not he proclaim'd by Richard that dead is
the next of blood?
Peace, cousin. Say no more.
And now I will unclasp a secret book,
and to your quick-conceiving discontents,
I'll read you matter deep and dangerous,
as full of peril and adventurous spirit
as to o'er-walk a current roaring loud
on the unsteadfast footing of a spear.
If he fall in, good night!
Or sink or swim.
Send danger from the east unto the west,
so honor cross it from the north to south,
and let them grapple.
O, the blood more stirs
to rouse a lion than to start a hare.
Imagination of some great exploit
drives him beyond the bounds of patience.
By heaven, methinks it were an easy leap
to pluck bright honor from the pale-faced moon
or dive into the bottom of the deep,
where fathom-line could never touch the ground,
and pluck up drowned honor by the locks
so he that doth redeem her thence
might wear without corrival all her dignities.
But out upon this half-faced fellowship!
He apprehends a world of figures here
but not the form of what he should attend.
Good cousin, give me audience for a while.
Oh, I cry you mercy.
Those same noble Scots That are your prisoners--
I'll keep them all.
By God, he shall not have a Scot of them.
No, if a Scot should save his soul, he shall not.
I'll keep them, by this hand.
You start away and lend no ear unto my purposes.
Those prisoners, you shall keep.
Nay, I will. That's flat.
He said he would not ransom Mortimer,
forbad my tongue to speak of Mortimer.
But I will find him when he lies asleep,
and in his ear, I'll holla, "Mortimer!"
Nay, I'll have a starling shall be taught
to speak nothing but "Mortimer"
and give it him to keep his anger still in motion.
Hear you, cousin; a word.
All studies here I solemnly defy,
save how to gall and pinch this Bolingbroke
and that same sword-and-buckler Prince of Wales.
But that his father loves him not
and would be glad he met with some mischance,
I'd have him poison'd with a pot of ale.
Fare you well, kinsman.
I'll talk to you when you're better temper'd to attend.
Why, what a wasp-stung and impatient fool art thou
to break into this woman's mood,
tying thine ear to no tongue but thine own.
Why, look you, I am whipp'd and scourged with rods,
nettled and stung with pismires
when I hear of this vile politician, Bolingbroke.
In Richard's time-- what do you call the place?
A plague upon it; it is in Gloucestershire.
'Twas where the madcap duke his uncle kept, his uncle York,
where I first bow'd my knee unto this king of smiles,
this Bolingbroke.
'Sblood!
When you and he came back from Ravenspurgh.
At Berkley castle.
You say true.
Why, what a candy deal of courtesy
this fawning greyhound then did proffer me.
Look, "when his infant fortune came to age,"
And "gentle Harry Percy," and "kind cousin."
Oh, the devil take such cozeners!
God forgive me.
Good uncle, tell your tale.
I have done.
Nay, if you have not, to it again.
We will stay your leisure.
I have done, i' faith!
Then once more to your Scottish prisoners.
Deliver them up without their ransom straight,
and make the Douglas' son your only mean
for powers in Scotland,
which, for divers reasons which I shall send you written,
be assured, shall easily be granted.
You, my lord,
your son in Scotland being thus employ'd,
shall secretly into the bosom creep
of that same noble prelate, the archbishop.
Of York, is it not?
True, who bears hard his brother's death at Bristol,
the Lord Scroop.
I speak not this in estimation, as what I think might be,
but what I know is ruminated, plotted, and set down
and only stays but to behold the face
of that occasion that shall bring it on.
I smell it.
Upon my life, it will do well.
Before the game is afoot, thou still let'st slip.
Why, it cannot choose but be a noble plot.
And then the power of Scotland and of York
to join with Mortimer, ha?
And so they shall.
Upon my life, it is exceedingly well aim'd.
And 'tis no little reason bids us speed,
to save our heads by raising of a head,
for, bear ourselves as even as we can,
the king will always think him in our debt
and think we think ourselves unsatisfied,
till he hath found a time to pay us home.
And see already how he doth begin
to make us strangers to his looks of love.
He does. He does.
We'll be revenged upon him.
Cousin, farewell.
No further go in this
than I by letters shall direct your course.
When time is ripe, which will be suddenly,
I'll steal to Glendower and Lord Mortimer,
where you and Douglas and our powers at once,
as I will fashion it, shall happily meet
to bear our fortunes in our own strong arms,
which now we hold at much uncertainty.
Farewell, good brother.
We shall thrive, I trust.
Uncle, adieu.
Oh, let the hours be short
till fields and blows and groans applaud our sport.
Heigh-ho!
An it be not four by the day, I'll be hanged.
Charles' wain is over the new chimney
and yet our horse not packed.
What, ostler!
I prithee, Tom, beat Cut's saddle.
Put a few flocks in the point.
The poor jade is wrung in the withers out of all cess.
Peas and beans are as dank here as a dog.
That's the next way to give poor jades the bots.
This house is turned upside down since Robin Ostler died.
Poor fellow, he's never joyed since the price of oats rose.
It was the death of him.
I think this be the most villainous house
in all London road for fleas.
I'm stung like a tench.
What, ostler!
Come away and be hanged!
Come away!
I've a gammon of bacon and two razors of ginger,
to be delivered as far as Charing-cross.
God's body!
The turkeys in my pannier are quite starved.
Come, neighbour Mugs.
We'll call up the gentlemen.
They will along with company, for they have great charge.
What ho, chamberlain.
At hand, quoth pick-purse.
Good morrow, Master Peto.
It holds current that I told you yesternight.
There's a franklin in the wild of Kent
hath brought three hundred marks with him in gold.
I heard him tell it to one of his party
last night at supper, a kind of auditor,
one that hath abundance of charge too, God knows what.
Here.
They're up already and call for eggs and butter.
They will away presently.
Sirrah, if they meet not with Saint Nicholas' clerks,
I'll give thee this neck.
Nay, I'll none of it.
I pray thee keep that for the hangman,
for I know thou worshippest St. Nicholas
as truly as a man of falsehood may.
What talkest thou to me of the hangman?
If I hang, I'll make a fat pair of gallows,
for if I hang, old Sir John hangs with me,
and thou knowest he's no starveling.
Tut!
There are other Trojans that thou dreamest not of,
the which for sport sake
are content to do the profession some grace,
that would, if matters should be looked into,
for their own credit sake, make all whole.
I'm joined with no foot-land rakers,
no long-staff sixpenny strikers,
none of your mad mustachio purple-hued malt-worms
but with nobility and tranquility,
burgomasters and great oneyers.
Give me your hand.
Thou shalt have a share in our purchase,
as I am a true man.
Nay, rather let me have it, as thou art a false thief.
Come!
Shelter, shelter.
I have removed Falstaff's horse,
and he frets like a gummed velvet.
Stand close.
Poins, and be hanged!
Poins!
Peace, ye fat-kidneyed rascal.
What a brawling dost thou keep.
Where's Poins, Hal?
He is walked up to the top of the hill.
I'll go seek him.
I'm accursed to rob.in that thief's company.
The rascal hath removed my horse and tied him I know not where.
If I travel but four foot further afoot,
I shall break my wind.
Poins, Hal!
A plague on you both!
Bardolph, Peto!
I'll starve ere I'll rob a foot further.
Eight yards of uneven ground
is threescore and ten miles afoot with me,
and the stony-hearted villains know it well enough.
A plague upon it when thieves cannot be true one to another.
A plague on you all.
Give me my horse, you rogues.
Give me my horse, and be hanged!
Peace, ye fat-guts!
Lie down.
Lay thine ear close to the ground,
and list if thou canst hear the tread of travelers.
Have you any levers to lift me up again, being down?
'Sblood, I'll not bear my own flesh so far afoot again
for all the coin in thy father's exchequer.
What a plague mean ye to colt me thus?
Thou liest.
Thou art not colted; thou art uncolted.
I prithee, good Prince Hal, help me to my horse,
good king's son.
Out, ye rogue.
Shall I be your ostler?
Hang thyself in thine own heir-apparent garters.
If I be ta'en, I'll peach for this.
An I have not ballads made on you all
and sung to filthy tunes, let a cup of sack be my poison.
Stand!
So I do, against my will.
O, 'tis our setter.
I know his voice.
Bardolph, what news?
Case ye. Case ye.
On with your vizards.
There's money of the king's coming down the hill.
'Tis going to the king's exchequer.
You lie, ye rogue.
'Tis going to the king's tavern.
There's enough to make us all.
To be hanged.
Sirs, you three shall front them in the narrow lane.
Ned Poins and I will walk lower.
If they 'scape from your encounter,
then they light on us.
How many be there of them?
Some eight or ten.
'Zounds, will they not rob us?
What, a coward, Sir John Paunch?
Indeed, I'm not John of Gaunt, your grandfather,
but yet no coward, Hal.
I'll leave that to the proof.
Sirrah Jack, thy horse stands behind the hedge.
When thou needest him, there thou shalt find him.
Now cannot I strike him, if I should be hanged.
Ned, where are our disguises?
Here, hard by.
Stand close.
Now, my masters, happy man be his dole, say I.
Every man to his business.
Strike!
Down with them!
Cut the villains' throats!
Ay, whoreson caterpillars!
Bacon-fed knaves!
They hate us youth!
Down with them!
Now, my masters, let us to horse before day.
An the Prince and Poins be not two arrant cowards,
there's no equity stirring.
There's no more valor in that Poins
than in a wild duck.
Got with much ease.
Falstaff sweats to death.
He lards the lean earth as he walks along.
Were 't not for laughing, I would pity him.
Ooh, how the fat rogue roar'd.
"But for mine own part, my lord,
"I could be well contented to be there,
in respect of the love I bear your house."
He could be contented?
Why is he not, then?
In respect of the love he bears our house,
he shows in this he loves his own barn better
than he loves our house.
Let me see some more.
"The purpose you undertake is dangerous."
Why, that's certain.
'Tis dangerous to take a cold, to sleep, to drink.
But I tell you, my lord fool, out of this nettle, danger,
we pluck this flower, safety.
"The purpose you undertake is dangerous,
"the friends you have named uncertain,
"the time itself unsorted, and your whole plot too light
for the counterpoise of so great an opposition."
Say you so? Say you so?
I say unto you again,
you're a shallow, cowardly hind, and you lie.
What a lack-brain is this!
By the Lord, our plot is a good plot as ever was laid,
our friends true and constant.
A good plot, good friends, and full of expectation.
An excellent plot, very good friends.
What a frosty-spirited rogue is this.
Why, my lord of York commends the plot
and the general course of the action.
'Zounds, an I were now by this rascal,
I could brain him with his lady's fan.
Is there not my father, my uncle, and myself?
Lord Edmund Mortimer, my lord of York,
and Owen Glendower?
Is there not besides the Douglas?
Have I not all their letters to meet me in arms
by the ninth of the next month?
And are they not some of them set forward already?
What a pagan rascal is this!
An infidel!
Ha!
You shall see now,
out of very sincerity of fear and cold heart
will he to the king
and lay open all our proceedings.
Oh, I could divide myself and go to buffets
for moving such a dish of skim milk
with so honorable an action!
Hang him!
Let him tell the king.
We are prepared.
I will set forward tonight.
How now, Kate.
I must leave you within these two hours.
My good lord, why are you thus alone?
For what offense have I this fortnight been
a banish'd woman from my Harry's bed?
Tell me, sweet lord,
what is't that takes from thee thy stomach, pleasure,
and thy golden sleep?
Why dost thou bend thine eyes upon the earth
and start so often when thou sit'st alone?
Why hast thou lost the fresh blood in thy cheeks
and given my treasures and my rights of thee
to thick-eyed musing and cursed melancholy?
In thy faint slumbers, I by thee have watch'd
and heard thee murmur tales of iron wars,
speak terms of manage to thy bounding steed,
cry "Courage!
To the field!"
And thou hast talk'd of sallies and retires,
of trenches, tents,
of palisadoes, frontiers, parapets,
of basilisks, of cannon, culverin,
of prisoners' ransom and of soldiers slain
and all the currents of a heady fight.
Thy spirit within thee hath been so at war
and thus hath so bestirr'd thee in thy sleep
that beads of sweat have stood upon thy brow
like bubbles in a late-disturbed stream.
And in thy face, strange motions have appear'd
such as we see when men restrain their breath
on some great sudden hest.
Oh, what portents are these?
Some heavy business hath my lord in hand,
and I must know it, else he loves me not.
What, ho!
Is Gilliams with the packet gone?
He is, my lord, an hour ago.
Hath Butler brought those horses from the sheriff?
One horse, my lord, he brought even now.
What horse?
A roan, a crop-ear, is it not?
It is, my lord.
That roan shall be my throne.
Well, I will back him straight.
O esperance!
But hear you, my lord.
What say'st thou, my lady?
What is it carries you away?
Why, my horse, my love, my horse.
Out, you mad-headed ape!
A weasel hath not such a deal of spleen
as you are toss'd with.
In faith, I'll know thy business, Harry,
that I will.
I fear my brother Mortimer doth stir about his title
and hath sent for you to line his enterprise.
But if you go--
So far afoot, I shall be weary, love.
Oh, come, come, you paraquito.
Answer me directly unto this question that I ask.
In faith, I'll break thy little finger, Harry,
an if thou wilt not tell me all things true.
Ah!
Away.
Away, you trifler!
Love!
I love thee not.
I care not for thee, Kate.
This is no world to play with mammets
and to tilt with lips.
We must have bloody noses and crack'd crowns
and pass them current too.
God's me, my horse!
What say'st thou, Kate?
What would'st thou have of me?
Do you not love me?
Do you not, indeed?
Well, do not then, for since you love me not,
I will not love myself.
Do you not love me?
Nay, tell me if you speak in jest or no.
Come.
Will you see me ride?
And when I am on horseback,
I will swear I love thee infinitely.
But hark you, Kate.
I must not have you henceforth question me
whither I go, nor reason whereabout.
Whither I must, I must, and, to conclude,
this evening must I leave you, gentle Kate.
I know you're wise
but yet no farther wise than Harry Percy's wife.
Constant you are but yet a woman.
And for secrecy, no lady closer, for I well believe
thou wilt not utter what thou dost not know.
And so far will I trust thee, gentle Kate.
How, so far?
Not an inch further.
But hark you, Kate.
Whither I go, thither shall you go too.
Today will I set forth, tomorrow you.
Will this content you, Kate?
It must, of force.
Ned, prithee, come out of that fat room,
and lend me thy hand to laugh a little.
Where hast been, Hal?
With three or four loggerheads
amongst three or four score hogsheads.
I have sounded the very base-string of humility.
Sirrah, I am sworn brother to a leash of drawers
and can call them all by their christen names,
as Tom, Dick, and Francis.
They take it already upon their salvation
that though I be prince of Wales yet,
I am king of courtesy and tell me flatly
I'm no proud Jack, like Falstaff,
but a Corinthian, a lad of mettle, a good boy,
by the Lord, so they call me.
And when I'm king of England,
I shall command all the good lads in Eastcheap.
Old Sir John and and a few dozen more
are at the door.
Shall I let them in?
Let them alone awhile.
I am now of all humors
that have showed themselves humors
since the old days of goodman Adam
to the pupil age of this present twelve o'clock at midnight.
I am not yet of Percy's mind, the Hotspur of the north,
he that kills me
some six or seven dozen Scots at a breakfast,
washes his hands, and says to his wife.
"Fie upon this quiet life!
I want work."
"Oh, my sweet Harry," says she,
"how many hast thou killed today?"
"Give my roan horse a drench," says he
and answers "some fourteen" an hour after.
"A trifle, a trifle."
I prithee, call in Falstaff.
I'll play Percy,
and that damned brawn shall play Dame Mortimer his wife.
Falstaff!
"Rivo," says the drunkard!
Call in ribs! Call in tallow!
Welcome, Jack.
Where hast thou been?
A plague of all cowards, I say, and a vengeance too.
Marry, and amen.
Give me a cup of sack, boy.
Ere I lead this life long,
I'll sew nether stocks and mend them and foot them too.
A plague of all cowards.
Give me a cup of sack, rogue!
Is there no virtue extant?
Didst thou never see Titan kiss a dish of butter?
Pitiful-hearted Titan,
that melted at the sweet tale of the sun's.
If thou didst, then behold that compound.
You rogue!
There's lime in this sack too.
There's nothing but roguery to be found in villainous man.
But a coward is worse than a cup of sack with lime in it.
A villainous coward.
"Go thy ways, old Jack.
Die when thou wilt."
If manhood, good manhood,
be not forgot upon the face of the earth,
then am I a shotten herring.
There lives not three good men unhanged in England,
and one of them is fat and grows old.
God help the while.
A bad world, I say.
I would I were a weaver; I could sing psalms or anything.
A plague of all cowards, I say still.
How now, wool-sack.
What mutter you?
A king's son!
Oh, if I do not beat thee out of thy kingdom
with a dagger of lath and drive all thy subjects
afore thee like a flock of wild geese,
I'll never wear hair on my face more.
You Prince of Wales!
Why, you whoreson round man, what's the matter?
Are not you a coward?
Answer me that.
And Poins there?
'Zounds, ye fat paunch.
Ye call me a coward.
By the Lord, I'll stab thee.
I, call thee coward?
I'll see thee damned ere I call thee coward.
But I'd give a thousand pounds
I could run as fast as thou canst.
You're straight enough in the shoulders,
you care not who sees your back.
Call you that backing of your friends?
A plague upon such backing!
Give me them that will face me.
Give me a cup of sack!
I'm a rogue, if I drunk today.
Come on, come on, come on, come on.
Oh, villain.
Thy lips are scarce wiped since thou drunkest last.
All's one for that.
A plague of all cowards, I say still.
What's the matter?
There be three of us here
have ta'en a thousand pound this day morning.
Where is it, Jack? Where is it?
Where is it?
Ta'en from us it is, a hundred upon poor three of us.
What, a hundred?
I am a villain
if I was not at half-sword
with a dozen of them two hours together.
I have 'scaped by miracle.
I am eight times thrust through the doublet,
four through the hose,
my buckler cut through and through,
my sword hacked like a hand-saw.
Ecce signum.
I never dealt better since I was a man.
All would not do.
A plague of all cowards.
Let them speak.
If they speak more or less than truth,
they are villains and the sons of darkness.
Speak, sirs. How was it?
We three set up some dozen--
Sixteen at least, my lord, and bound them.
No, no, they were not bound.
They were bound, every one of them,
or I'm a Jew else, an Ebrew Jew.
As we were sharing,
some six or seven fresh men set upon us--
And unbound the rest, and then come in the other.
What, fought you with them all?
All?
I know not what you call "all."
But if I fought not with fifty of them,
then am I a bunch of radish.
If there were not two or three and fifty on poor old Jack,
then am I no two-legged creature.
Pray God you have not murdered some of them.
Oh, no, that's past praying for.
I have peppered two of them.
Two, I am sure I have paid, two rogues in buckram suits.
I tell thee what, Hal.
If I tell thee a lie, spit in my face, call me horse.
Thou knowest my old ward.
Here I lay.
Thus I bore my point.
Four rogues in buckram let drive at me--
What, four? Thou saidst but two even now.
Four, Hal.
I told thee four.
Ay, ay, he said four.
These four came all a-front and mainly thrust at me.
I made me no more ado
but took all their seven points in my target, thus.
Seven? Why, there were but four even now.
In buckram?
Ay, four in buckram suits.
Seven, by these hilts,
or I'm a villain else.
Prithee, let him alone. We shall have more anon.
Dost thou hear, Hal?
Ay, and mark thee too, Jack.
Do so, for it is worth the listening to.
These nine in buckram that I told thee of--
So two more already.
Their points being broken--
Down fell their hose.
Began to give me ground.
But I followed me close, came in foot and hand.
And with a thought, seven of the eleven I paid.
O monstrous!
Eleven buckram men grown out of two!
But, as ill luck would have it,
three misbegotten knaves in Kendal green
came at my back and let drive at me,
for it was so dark, Hal,
thou couldst not see thy hand.
These lies are like their father that begets them:
gross as a mountain, open, palpable.
Why, thou clay-brained guts, thou knotty-pated fool,
thou whoreson, obscene, greasy tallow-catch.
What, art thou mad? Art thou mad?
Is not the truth the truth?
Why, how couldst thou know these men in Kendal green
when it was so dark thou couldst not see thy hand?
Come, tell us your reason.
What sayest thou to this?
Come, your reason, Jack.
Your reason.
What, upon compulsion?
'Zounds, an I were at the strappado
or all the racks in the world
I would not tell you on compulsion.
Give you a reason on compulsion?
If reasons were as plentiful as blackberries,
I would give no man a reason upon compulsion, I.
I'll be no longer guilty of this sin.
This sanguine coward, this bed-presser,
this horseback-breaker, this huge hill of flesh--
'Sblood, you starveling, you elf-skin,
you dried neat's tongue, you bull's pizzle,
you stock-fish!
O for breath to utter what is like thee!
You tailor's-yard, you sheath, you bowcase,
you vile standing-tuck--
Breathe awhile, and then do it again.
And when thou hast tired thyself in base comparisons,
hear me speak but this.
Mark, Jack.
We two saw you three set on four
and were masters of their wealth.
Mark now, how a plain tale shall put you down.
Then did we two set on you three
and, with a word, out-faced you from your prize
and have it.
Yea, and can show it you here in the house.
And, Falstaff, you carried your guts away as nimbly
with as quick dexterity,
and roared for mercy and still run and roared
as ever I heard bull-calf.
What a slave art thou, to hack thy sword
as thou hast done and then say it was in fight.
What trick, what device, what starting-hole
canst thou now find out to hide thee
from this open and apparent shame?
Come, Jack.
What trick hast thou now?
By the Lord, I knew ye as well as he that made ye.
Why, hear you, my masters.
Was it for me to kill the heir-apparent?
Should I turn upon the true prince?
Why, thou knowest I'm as valiant as Hercules.
But beware instinct.
The lion will not touch the true prince.
Instinct is a great matter.
I was now a coward upon instinct.
I shall think the better of myself and thee during my life:
I for a valiant lion, thou for a true prince.
But, by the Lord, lads, I'm glad you have the money.
Hostess, clap to the doors!
Watch today. Pray to-morrow.
Gallants, lads, boys, hearts of gold,
all the titles of good fellowship come to you.
What, shall we be merry?
Shall we have a play extempore?
Content, and the argument shall be thy running away.
No more of that, an thou lovest me!
My lord the prince!
How now, my lady the hostess.
What sayest thou to me?
Marry, my lord, a nobleman of the court is at door,
would speak with you.
He says he comes from your father.
Give him as much as will make him a royal man,
and send him back again to my mother.
-What manner of man is he? -An old man.
What doth gravity out of his bed at midnight?
Shall I give him,his answer?
Prithee, do, Jack.
'Faith, and I'll send him packing.
Now, sirs, by our lady, you fought fair, Peto.
So did you, Bardolph.
You are lions too.
You ran away upon instinct, would not touch the true prince.
No, fie!
I ran when I saw others run.
'Faith, tell me now in earnest,
how came Falstaff's sword so hacked?
Why, he hacked it with his dagger
and said he would swear truth out of England
but he would make you believe it was done in fight
and persuaded us to do the like.
Yea, and to tickle our noses with spear-grass
to make them bleed
and then to beslubber our garments with it
and swear it was the blood of true men.
I did what I did not this seven year before.
I blushed to hear his monstrous devices.
Villain, thou stolest a cup of sack eighteen years ago
and wert taken with the manner,
and ever since, thou hast blushed extempore.
Here comes lean Jack. Here comes bare-bone.
How now, my sweet creature of bombast!
How long is't ago, Jack,
since thou saw thine own knee?
My own knee?
When I was about thy years, Hal,
I was not an eagle's talon in the waist.
I could have crept into any alderman's thumb-ring.
A plague of sighing and grief;
it blows a man up like a bladder.
Now, shush, shush, shush.
There's villainous news abroad.
Here was Sir John Bracy from your father.
You must to the court in the morning.
That same mad fellow of the north, Percy,
and he of Wales that gave Amamon the bastinado
and made Lucifer cuckold and swore the devil
his true liegeman upon the cross of a Welsh hook--
what a plague call you him?
Oh, Glendower.
Owen, Owen, the same.
And his son-in-law Mortimer and old Northumberland
and that sprightly Scot of Scots, Douglas,
he that runs o' horseback up a hill perpendicular--
He that rides at high speed
and with his pistol kills,a sparrow flying.
You've hit it.
So did he never the sparrow.
Well, there's good mettle in that fellow.
He will not run.
Why, what a rascal art thou then
to praise him so for running.
O' horseback, ye cuckoo.
But afoot, he will not budge a foot.
Yes, Jack, upon instinct.
Well, I grant ye, upon instinct.
Well, he is there too and one Mordake
and a thousand blue-caps more.
Worcester is stolen away tonight.
Your father's beard is turned white at the news.
You may buy land now as cheap as stinking mackerel.
Why, then, it is like, if there come a hot June,
we shall buy maidenheads as they buy hob-nails:
by the hundreds.
Oh, by the mass, thou sayest true, lad.
It is like we shall have good trading that way.
But tell me, Hal, art not thou horrible afeard?
Thou being heir-apparent, could the world pick thee out
three such enemies again as that fiend Douglas,
that spirit Percy, and that devil Glendower?
Art thou not horribly afraid?
Doth not thy blood thrill at it?
Not a whit, i' faith.
I lack some of thy instinct.
Well, thou wert be horribly chid tomorrow
when thou comest to thy father.
An thou love me, practice an answer.
Do thou stand for my father
and examine me upon the particulars of my life.
Oh, uh, shall I?
Yes!
Content.
Come on, come on, come on.
This chair shall be my state, this dagger my scepter,
and this cushion my crown.
Give me a cup of sack to make my eyes look red,
that it may be thought I have wept.
Stand aside, nobility.
O Jesu, this is excellent sport, i' faith!
Weep not, sweet queen...
for trickling tears are vain.
O, the father, see how he holds his countenance!
For God's sake, lords, convey my tristful queen.
For tears do stop the flood-gates of her eyes.
O Jesu, he doth it as like one
of these harlotry players as ever I see.
Peace, good pint-pot.
Peace, good tickle-brain.
Harry.
Ah, yea.
I do not only marvel where thou spendest thy time
but also how thou art accompanied.
There is a thing, Harry, which thou hast often heard of,
and it is known to many in this land by the name of pitch.
This pitch, as ancient writers do report,
doth defile.
So doth the company thou keepest.
Harry, I do not speak to thee in drink but in tears,
not in pleasure but in passion,
not in words only but in woes also.
And yet there is a virtuous man
whom I have often noted in thy company,
but I know not his name.
What manner of man, an it like your majesty?
A goodly, portly man, i' faith, and a corpulent,
of a cheerful look, a pleasing eye,
and a most noble carriage.
And, as I think, his age some fifty,
or, by'r lady, inclining to three score.
And now I remember me; his name is...
Falstaff.
If that man should be lewdly given,
he deceiveth me,
for, Harry, I see virtue in his looks.
If then the tree shall be known by the fruit,
as the fruit by the tree, then, peremptorily I speak it,
there is virtue in that Falstaff.
Him, keep with. The rest, banish.
And now tell me, thou naughty varlet,
tell me, where hast thou been this month?
Dost thou speak like a king?
Do thou stand for me, and I'll play my father.
What?
Depose me?
Yea!
If thou dost it half so gravely, so majestically,
both in word and matter, hang me up by the heels
for a rabbit-sucker or a poulter's hare.
Here I am set.
And here I stand. Now judge, my masters.
Now, Harry, whence come you?
My noble lord, from Eastcheap.
The complaints I hear of thee are grievous.
'Sblood, my lord, they're false.
Nay, I'll tickle ye for a young prince, i' faith.
Swearest thou, ungracious boy?
Henceforth, ne'er look on me.
Thou art violently carried away from grace.
There is a devil haunts thee
in the likeness of an old, fat man.
A tun of man is thy companion.
Why dost thou converse with that trunk of humors,
that bolting-hutch of beastliness,
that swollen parcel of dropsies, that huge bombard of sack,
that stuffed cloak-bag of guts,
that roasted Manningtree ox with the pudding in his belly,
that reverend vice, that gray iniquity,
that father ruffian, that vanity in years?
Wherein is he good, but to taste sack and drink it?
Wherein neat and cleanly, but to carve a capon and eat it?
Wherein cunning, but in craft?
Wherein crafty, but in villainy?
Wherein villainous, but in all things?
Wherein worthy, but in nothing?
I would your grace would take me with you.
Whom means your grace?
That villainous abominable misleader of youth, Falstaff,
that old, white-bearded Satan.
Well, my lord, the man, I know.
I know thou dost.
But to say that I know more harm in him than in myself
were to say more than I know.
That he is old, the more the pity,
his white hairs do witness it.
But that he is, saving your reverence,
a whoremaster, that, I utterly deny.
If sack and sugar be a fault, God help the wicked.
If to be old and merry be a sin,
then many an old host that I know is damned.
If to be fat be to be hated,
then Pharaoh's lean kine are to be loved.
No, my good lord.
Banish Peto.
Banish Bardolph.
Banish Poins.
But for sweet Jack Falstaff, kind Jack Falstaff,
true Jack Falstaff, valiant Jack Falstaff,
and therefore more valiant, being, as he is,
old Jack Falstaff,
banish not him thy Harry's company.
Banish not him thy Harry's company.
Banish plump Jack, and banish all the world.
I do.
I will.
My lord! My lord!
The sheriff, with a most monstrous watch,
is at the door.
Out, ye rogue!
Play out the play.
I have much to say in the behalf of that Falstaff.
O Jesu, my lord, my lord.
Heigh, the devil rides on a fiddlestick.
What's the matter?
The sheriff and all the watch are at the door.
They are come to search the house.
Shall I let them in?
Dost thou hear, Hal?
Never call a true piece of gold a counterfeit.
Thou art essentially mad, without seeming so.
And thou a natural coward without instinct.
I deny your major.
If you will deny the sheriff, so.
If not, let him enter.
If I become not a cart as well as another man,
a plague upon my bringing up.
I hope I shall be as soon strangled with a halter as another.
Go hide thee behind the arras.
The rest walk up above.
Now, my masters, for a good face and a true conscience.
Both which I have had, but their date is out,
and therefore I'll hide me.
Call in the sheriff.
Now, master sheriff, what is your will with me?
First, pardon me, my lord.
A hue and cry hath follow'd several men unto this house.
What men?
One of them is well known, my gracious lord,
a gross, fat man.
As fat as butter.
The man, I do assure you, is not here,
for I myself at this time have employ'd him.
And, sheriff, I will engage my word to thee
that I will, by dinnertime tomorrow,
send him to answer thee, or any man,
for any thing he shall be charged withal.
And so let me entreat you leave the house.
I will, my lord.
There are two gentlemen
have in this robbery lost three hundred marks.
It may be so.
If he have robb'd these men, he shall be answerable.
And so farewell.
Good night, my noble lord.
I think it is good morrow, is it not?
Indeed, my lord, methinks it be two o'clock.
This oily rascal is known as well as Paul's.
Go, call him forth.
Falstaff!
Behind the arras, and snorting like a horse.
Hark, how hard he fetches breath.
Search his pockets.
What hast thou found?
Nothing but papers, my lord.
Let's see what they be. Read them.
"Item, a capon, 2s2d.
"Item, sauce, 4d.
"Item, sack, two gallons, 5s8d.
"Item, anchovies and sack after supper, 2s6d.
Item, bread, ha'penny."
Oh, monstrous.
But one ha'penny-worth of bread
to this intolerable deal of sack.
What there is else, keep close.
We'll read it at more advantage.
There let him sleep till day.
I'll to the court in the morning.
We must all to the wars,
and thy place shall be honorable.
I'll procure this fat rogue a charge of foot.
And I know his death will be a march of twelve-score.
The money shall be paid back again with advantage.
Be with me betimes in the morning.
And so good morrow, Ned.
Good morrow, good my lord.
These promises are fair, the parties sure,
and our induction full of prosperous hope.
Lord Mortimer and cousin Glendower,
will you sit down?
And uncle Worcester.
A plague upon it.
I have forgot the map.
No, here it is.
Sit, cousin Percy.
Sit, good cousin Hotspur.
For by that name as oft as Lancaster doth speak of you,
his cheek looks pale,
and with a rising sigh, he wisheth you in heaven.
And you in hell
as oft as he hears Owen Glendower spoke of.
I cannot blame him.
At my nativity, the front of heaven
was full of fiery shapes, of burning cressets.
And at my birth, the frame and huge foundation
of the earth shaked like a coward.
Why, so it would have done at the same season
if your mother's cat had but kittened,
though yourself had never been born.
I say the earth did shake when I was born.
And I say the earth was not of my mind,
if you suppose as fearing you it shook.
The heavens were all on fire. The earth did tremble.
Oh, then the earth shook to see the heavens on fire
and not in fear of your nativity.
Cousin, of many men I do not bear these crossings.
Give me leave to tell you once again
that at my birth,
the front of heaven was full of fiery shapes.
The goats ran from the mountains,
and the herds were strangely clamorous
to the frighted fields.
These signs have mark'd me extraordinary!
I think there's no man speaks better Welsh.
I'll to dinner.
Peace, cousin Percy.
You will make him mad.
I can call spirits from the vasty deep!
Why, so can I, or so can any man.
But will they come when you do call for them?
Why, I can teach you, cousin, to command the devil.
And I can teach thee, coz, to shame the devil
by telling truth.
Tell truth and shame the devil.
If thou have power to raise him, bring him hither,
and I'll be sworn I have the power to shame him hence.
O, while you live, tell truth and shame the devil!
Come, come; no more of this unprofitable chat.
Three times hath Henry Bolingbroke
made head against my power.
Thrice from the banks of Wye and sandy-bottom'd Severn
have I sent him bootless home and weather-beaten back.
Home without boots, and in foul weather too.
How 'scapes he agues, in the devil's name?
Come! Here is the map.
Shall we divide our right
according to our threefold order ta'en?
The archdeacon hath divided it into three limits very equally:
England, from Trent and Severn hitherto,
by south and east is to my part assign'd.
All westward, Wales beyond the Severn shore
and all the fertile lands within that bound,
to Owen Glendower.
And, dear coz, to you
the remnant northward, lying off from Trent.
And our indentures tripartite are drawn,
which being sealed interchangeably,
a business that this night may execute,
tomorrow, cousin Percy, you and I
and my good Lord of Worcester will set forth
to meet your father and the Scottish power,
as is appointed us, at Shrewsbury.
My father Glendower is not ready yet,
nor shall we need his help these fourteen days.
Within that space, you may have drawn together
your tenants, friends, and neighboring gentlemen.
Methinks my moiety, north from Burton here,
in quantity equals not one of yours.
See how this river comes me cranking in
and cuts me from the best of all my land
a huge half-moon, a monstrous cantle out.
I'll have the current in this place damm'd up.
And here the smug and silver Trent
shall run in a new channel, fair and evenly.
It shall not wind with such a deep indent
to rob me of so rich a bottom here.
Not wind?
It shall. It must.
You see it doth.
Yea, but mark how he bears his course
and runs me up with like advantage
on the other side,
gelding the opposed continent as much as on the other side,
it takes from you.
Yea, but a little charge will trench him here
and on this north side win this cape of land.
And then he runs straight and even.
I'll have it so.
A little charge will do it.
I'll not have it alter'd.
Will not you?
No, nor you shall not.
Who shall say me nay?
Why, that will I.
Let me not understand you, then; speak it in Welsh.
I can speak English, lord, as well as you,
for I was train'd up in the English court,
where, being but young, I framed to the harp
many an English ditty lovely well
and gave the tongue a helpful ornament,
a virtue that was never seen in you.
Marry, and I'm glad of it with all my heart.
I'd rather be a kitten and cry mew
than one of these same meter ballad-mongers.
I'd rather hear a brazen canstick turn'd
or a dry wheel grate on the axle-tree.
And that would set my teeth nothing on edge,
nothing so much as mincing poetry.
'Tis like the forced gait of a shuffling nag.
Come; you shall have Trent turn'd.
I do not care.
I'll give thrice so much land to any well-deserving friend.
But in the way of bargain, mark ye me,
I'll cavil on the ninth part of a hair.
Are the indentures drawn?
Shall we be gone?
The moon shines fair.
You may away by night.
I'll haste the writer and withal break with your wives
of your departure hence.
I am afraid my daughter will run mad,
so much she doteth on her Mortimer.
Fie, cousin Percy.
How you cross my father.
I cannot choose.
Sometimes he angers me
with telling me of the mouldwarp and the ant
and such a deal of skimble-skamble stuff
as puts me from my faith.
I tell you what; he held me last night
at least nine hours in reckoning up
the several devils' names that were his lackeys.
I cried "hum" and "well, go to"
and mark'd him not a word.
Oh, he's as tedious as a tired horse,
a railing wife, worse than a smoky house.
I'd rather live with cheese and garlic in a windmill, far,
than feed on cates and have him talk to me
in any summer-house in Christendom.
In faith, he is a worthy gentleman,
exceedingly well read
and profited in strange concealments,
valiant as a lion, and wondrous affable
and bountiful as mines of India.
Shall I tell you, cousin?
He holds your temper in a high respect
and curbs himself even of his natural scope
when you come 'cross his humor.
Faith, he does.
I warrant you, that man is not alive
might so have tempted him as you have done
without the taste of danger and reproof.
But do not use it oft, let me entreat you.
In faith, my lord, you are too willful-blame
and, since your coming hither, have done enough
to put him quite beside his patience.
You must needs learn, lord, to amend this fault.
Well, I am school'd.
Good manners be your speed.
Here come our wives.
Let us take our leave.
This is the deadly spite that angers me.
My wife can speak no English, I no Welsh.
My daughter weeps.
She'll not part with you.
She'll be a soldier too.
She'll to the wars.
Good father, tell her that she and my aunt Percy
shall follow in your conduct speedily.
She is desperate here--
a peevish self-willed harlotry,
one that no persuasion can do good upon.
I understand thy looks.
That pretty Welsh which thou pour'st down
from these swelling heavens I am too perfect in.
And, but for shame,
in such a parley should I answer thee.
I understand thy kisses and thou mine,
and that's a feeling disputation.
But I will never be a truant, love,
till I have learned thy language,
for thy tongue makes Welsh as sweet
as ditties highly penn'd,
sung by a fair queen in a summer's bower,
with ravishing division, to her lute.
Nay, if you melt, then will she run mad.
Oh, I am ignorance itself in this!
She bids you on the wanton rushes lay you down
and rest your gentle head upon her lap,
and she will sing the song that pleaseth you
and on your eyelids crown the god of sleep,
charming your blood with pleasing heaviness,
making such difference 'twixt wake and sleep
as is the difference betwixt day and night
the hour before the heavenly-harness'd team
begins his golden progress in the east.
With all my heart, I'll sit and hear her sing.
By that time will our book, I think, be drawn.
Do so.
And those musicians that shall play to you
hang in the air a thousand leagues from hence,
and straight they shall be here.
Sit, and attend.
Come, Kate.
Thou art perfect in lying down.
Quick, quick, that I may lay my head in thy lap.
Oh, go, ye giddy goose.
Now I perceive the devil understands Welsh.
And 'tis no marvel he's so humorous.
By'r lady,,he is a good musician.
Yes.
Then should you be nothing but musical,
for you are altogether governed by humors.
Lie still, ye thief,
and hear the lady sing in Welsh.
I had rather hear, lady, my brach, howl in Irish.
Oh, wouldst thou have thy head broken?
-No. -Then be still.
Neither. 'Tis a woman's fault.
Now God help thee.
To the Welsh lady's bed.
What's that?
Peace, she sings.
Come, Kate. I'll have your song too.
Not mine, in good sooth.
Not yours, in good sooth?
Heart, you swear like a comfit-maker's wife.
"Not you, in good sooth," and "as sure as I live"
and "as God shall mend me," and "as sure as day"
and givest such sarcenet surety for thy oaths
as if thou never walk'st further than Finsbury.
Swear me, Kate, like a lady as thou art,
a good mouth-filling oath, and leave "in sooth"
and such protest of pepper-gingerbread
to velvet-guards and Sunday-citizens.
Come, sing.
I will not sing.
'Tis the next way to turn tailor
or be red-breast teacher.
An the indentures be drawn,
I'll away within these two hours.
And so come in when ye will.
Come, come, Lord Mortimer.
You are as slow as hot Lord Percy is on fire to go.
By this our book is drawn.
We'll but seal, and then to horse immediately.
With all my heart.
I know not whether God will have it so,
for some displeasing service I have done,
that, in his secret doom, out of my blood
he'll breed revengement and a scourge for me.
But thou dost in thy passages of life
make me believe that thou art only mark'd
for the hot vengeance and the rod of heaven
to punish my mistreadings.
Tell me else,
could such inordinate and low desires,
such poor, such bare, such lewd, such mean attempts,
such barren pleasures, rude society
as thou art match'd withal and grafted to
accompany the greatness of thy blood
and hold their level with thy princely heart?
So please your majesty, I would I could quit
all offenses with as clear excuse
as well as I am doubtless I can purge myself
of many I am charged withal.
God pardon thee.
Yet let me wonder, Harry, at thy affections,
which do hold a wing quite from the flight
of all thy ancestors.
Thy place in council, thou hast rudely lost
which by thy younger brother is supplied
and art almost an alien to the hearts
of all the court and princes of my blood.
The hope and expectation of thy time is ruin'd,
and the soul of every man
prophetically do forethink thy fall.
Had I so lavish of my presence been,
so common-hackney'd in the eyes of men,
so stale and cheap to vulgar company,
opinion, that did help me to the crown,
had still kept loyal to possession
and left me in reputeless banishment,
a fellow of no mark nor likelihood.
By being seldom seen, I could not stir
but like a comet I was wonder'd at,
that men would tell their children, "This is he."
Others would say, "Where? Which is Bolingbroke?"
And then I stole all courtesy from heaven
and dress'd myself in such humility
that I did pluck allegiance from men's hearts,
loud shouts and salutations from their mouths,
even in the presence of the crowned king.
Thus did I keep my person fresh and new.
My presence, like a robe pontifical,
ne'er seen but wonder'd at.
And so my state, seldom but sumptuous,
showed like a feast and won by rareness such solemnity.
The skipping king, he ambled up and down
with shallow jesters and rash bavin wits,
soon kindled and soon burnt.
Carded his state,
mingled his royalty with capering fools,
had his great name profaned with their scorns,
and gave his countenance, against his name,
to laugh at gibing boys and stand the push
of every beardless vain comparative,
grew a companion to the common streets,
enfeoff'd himself to popularity
that, being daily swallow'd by men's eyes,
they surfeited with honey and began to loathe
the taste of sweetness,
whereof a little more than a little
is by much too much.
So when he had occasion to be seen,
he was but as the cuckoo is in June:
heard, not regarded; seen, but with such eyes
as, sick and blunted with community,
afford no extraordinary gaze,
such as is bent on sun-like majesty
when it shines seldom in admiring eyes,
but rather drowzed and hung their eyelids down,
slept in his face, and render'd such aspect
as cloudy men use to their adversaries,
being with his presence glutted, gorged, and full.
And in that very line, Harry, standest thou,
for thou has lost thy princely privilege
with vile participation.
Not an eye But is a-weary of thy common sight, save mine,
which hath desired to see thee more,
which now doth that I would not have it do:
make blind itself with foolish tenderness.
I shall hereafter, my thrice gracious lord,
be more myself.
For all the world as thou art to this hour
was Richard then,
when I from France set foot at Ravenspurgh.
And even as I was then is Percy now.
Now, by my scepter and my soul to boot,
he hath more worthy interest to the state
than thou the shadow of succession,
for of no right, nor color like to right,
he doth fill fields with harness in the realm,
turns head against the lion's armed jaws,
and, being no more in debt to years than thou,
leads ancient lords and reverend bishops on
to bloody battles and to bruising arms.
What never-dying honor hath he got
against renowned Douglas, whose high deeds,
whose hot incursions and great name in arms
holds from all soldiers chief majority
and military title capital
through all the kingdoms that acknowledge Christ.
And what say you to this?
Percy, Northumberland, the Archbishop's grace of York,
Douglas, Mortimer,
capitulate against us and are up.
But wherefore do I tell thee of those news?
Why, Harry, do I tell thee of my foes,
which art my near'st and dearest enemy?
Thou that art like enough, through vassal fear,
base inclination, and the start of spleen
to fight against me under Percy's pay,
to dog his heelsand curtsy at his frowns,
to show how much thou art degenerate!
Do not think so.
You shall not find it so.
And God forgive them that so much have sway'd
your majesty's good thoughts away from me.
I will redeem all this on Percy's head
and, in the closing of some glorious day,
be bold to tell you that I am your son,
when I will wear a garment all of blood
and stain my favors in a bloody mask,
which, wash'd away, shall scour my shame with it.
And that shall be the day, whene'er it lights,
that this same child of honor and renown,
this gallant Hotspur, this all-praised knight
and your unthought-of Harry chance to meet.
For every honor sitting on his helm,
would they were multitudes
and on my head my shames redoubled.
For the time will come
that I shall make this northern youth
exchange his glorious deeds for my indignities.
Percy is but my factor, good my lord,
to engross up glorious deeds on my behalf.
And I will call him to so strict account
that he shall render every glory up--
yea, even the slightest worship of his time--
or I will tear the reckoning from his heart.
This, in the name of God, I promise here,
the which if he be pleased, I shall perform,
I do beseech your majesty may salve
the long-grown wounds of my intemperture.
If not, the end of life cancels all bands,
and I will die a hundred thousand deaths
ere break the smallest parcel of this vow.
A hundred thousand rebels die in this,
thou shalt have charge and sovereign trust herein.
Oh, Bardolph.
Huh?
Am I not fallen away vilely since this last action?
Do I not bate?
Do I not dwindle?
My skin hangs about me
like an like an old lady's loose gown.
I am withered like an old apple-john.
Well, I'll repent, and that suddenly,
while I'm in some liking.
I shall be out of heart shortly,
and then I shall have no strength to repent.
An I've not forgotten what the inside of a church is made of.
I'm a peppercorn, a brewer's horse.
The inside of a church.
Company, villainous company, hath been the spoil of me.
Sir John, you are so fretful, you cannot live long.
Why, there is it.
Come sing me a bawdy song.
Make me merry.
Oh--
Oh, no, it's--
I've been as virtuously given as a gentleman need to be,
virtuous enough.
Swore little, diced not above seven times a week,
went to a bawdy-house not above once in a quarter...
of an hour,
paid money that I borrowed three or four times,
lived well and in good compass.
And now I live out of all order, out of all compass.
You are so fat, Sir John,
you must needs be out of all compass,
out of all reasonable...
compass, Sir John.
Do thou amend thy face, and I'll amend my life.
Thou art our admiral.
Thou bearest the lantern in the poop,
but 'tis in the nose of thee.
Thou art the Knight of the Burning Lamp.
Why, Sir John, my face does you no harm.
No, I'll be sworn.
I make as good use of it as many a man doth
of a Death's-head or a memento mori.
I never see thy face but I think of hell-fire
and Dives that lived in purple,
for there he is in his robes, burning, burning.
Oh, thou art a perpetual triumph,
an everlasting bonfire-light.
Thou hast saved me a thousand marks
in links and torches, walking with thee
in the night betwixt tavern and tavern.
But the sack that thou hast drunk me
would have bought me lights as good cheap
at the dearest chandler's in Europe.
I have maintained that salamander of yours
with fire any time this two and thirty years.
God reward me for it.
'Sblood, I would my face were in your belly!
God-a-mercy!
So should I be sure to be heart-burned.
How now, Dame Partlet the hen.
Have you inquired yet who picked my pocket?
Why, what do you think, Sir John?
Do you think I keep thieves in my house?
I have searched.
I have inquired
man by man, boy by boy, servant by servant.
The tithe of a hair was never lost in my house before.
Ye lie, hostess.
Bardolph was shaved and lost many a hair.
And I'll be sworn my pocket was picked.
Go to. You're a woman; go.
Who, I?
No, I defy thee.
God's light, I was never called so
in mine own house before.
Go to. I know you well enough.
No, Sir John.
You do not know me, Sir John.
I know you, Sir John.
You owe me money, Sir John,
and now you pick a quarrel to beguile me of it.
I bought you a dozen of shirts to your back.
Dowlas, filthy dowlas.
I gave them away to bakers' wives,
and they have made bolters of them.
Oh!
Now, as I'm a true woman,
holland of eight shillings an ell.
You owe money here besides, Sir John,
for your diet and by-drinkings and money lent you,
four and twenty pound.
He had his share of it; let him pay.
He?
Alas, he's poor. He has nothing.
How, poor?
Look at his face; what call you rich?
Let them coin his nose.
Let them coin his cheeks.
I'll not pay a denier.
What, will you make a younker of me?
Shall I not take mine ease in mine inn
but I shall have my pocket picked?
I have lost a seal-ring of my grandfather's
was worth forty mark.
Jesu, I have heard the prince tell him,
I know not how oft, that that ring was copper!
How?
The prince is a Jack, a sneak-cup.
'Sblood, an he were here, I'd cudgel him like a dog
if he should say so.
How now, lad.
Is the wind in that door, i' faith?
Must we all march?
Ay, two and two, Newgate fashion.
My lord, will you hear me?
Let her alone, and list to me.
What sayest thou, Jack?
The other night, I fell asleep here
behind the arras and had my pocket picked.
This house is turned bawdy-house.
They pick pockets.
What didst thou lose, Jack?
Wilt thou believe it, Hal?
Three or four bonds worth forty pound apiece
and a seal-ring of my grandfather's.
A trifle, some eight-penny matter.
So I told him, my lord,
and I said that I heard your grace say so.
And, my lord, he speaks most vilely of you,
like a foul-mouthed man as he is,
and said he would cudgel you.
What?
He did not.
There's neither faith, truth, nor womanhood in me else.
There's no more faith in thee than in a stewed prune.
Go, you thing, go.
Say, what thing?
What thing?
Well, a thing to thank God on.
Oh, I'm no thing to thank God on.
And, setting thy knighthood aside,
thou art a knave to say so.
Setting thy womanhood aside,
thou art a beast to say otherwise.
Say, what beast, thou knave, thou?
What beast? Why, an otter.
Oh!
An otter, Sir John?
Why an otter?
Well, because she's neither fish nor flesh,
and a man knows not where to have her.
Thou art an unjust man to say so.
Thou or any man know where to have me!
Thou knave, thou!
Thou sayest true, hostess,
and he slanders thee most grossly.
Charge an honest woman with picking thy pocket?
Why, thou whoreson, impudent, embossed rascal.
If there were anything in thy pocket
but tavern-reckonings, memorandums of bawdy-houses,
and one poor penny-worth of sugar-candy
to make thee long-winded, if thy pockets were enriched
with any other injuries but these, I am a villain.
You will confess then, that you picked my pocket?
It appears so by the story.
Hostess, I forgive thee.
Go, make ready breakfast.
Cherish thy servants, and look to thy guests.
Nay, prithee, be gone.
Now Hal, to the news at court.
For the robbery, lad, how is that answered?
Oh, my sweet beef, I must still be good angel to thee.
The money is paid back again.
Oh, I like not that paying back.
'Tis a double labor.
I'm good friends with my father and may do any thing.
Rob me the exchequer the first thing thou doest.
Do, my lord.
I have procured thee, Jack, a charge...
of foot.
-Bardolph! -My lord?
Go bear this letter to Lord John of Lancaster,
to my brother John, this to my Lord of Westmoreland.
Jack, meet me tomorrow in the temple hall
at two o'clock in the afternoon.
There shalt thy know thy charge,
and there receive money and order for their furniture.
The land is burning,
Percy stands on high,
and either we or they must lower lie.
Rare words.
Brave world.
Hostess, my breakfast.
Come.
Oh, I could wish this tavern were my drum.
Well said, my noble Scot.
If speaking truth in this fine age
were not thought flattery,
such attribution should the Douglas have,
as not a soldier of this season's stamp
should go so general current through the world.
By God, I cannot flatter.
I do defy the tongues of soothers.
But a braver place in my heart's love
hath no man than yourself.
Nay, task me to my word.
Approve me, lord.
Thou art the king of honor.
No man more potent breathes upon the ground
but I will beard him.
Do so, and 'tis well.
What letters hast thou there?
I can but thank you.
These letters come from your father.
Letters from him?
Why comes he not himself?
He cannot come, my lord; he is grievous sick.
'Zounds, how has he the leisure to be sick
in such a justling time?
Who leads his power?
Under whose government come they along?
His letters bear his mind, my lord, not I.
I prithee, tell me, doth he keep his bed?
He did, my lord, four days ere I set forth.
And at the time of my departure thence,
he was much fear'd by his physicians.
I would the state of time had first been whole
ere he by sickness had been visited.
His health was never better worth than now.
Sick now.
Droop now?
This sickness doth infect the very life-blood
of our enterprise.
'Tis catching hither, even to our camp.
He writes me here that inward sickness--
and that his friends could not by deputation
so soon be drawn, nor did he think it meet
to lay so dangerous and dear a trust
on any soul removed but on his own.
Yet doth he give us bold advertisement
that with our small conjunction we should on
to see how fortune is disposed to us,
for, as he writes, there is no quailing now.
Because the king is certainly possess'd
of all our purposes.
What say you to it?
Your father's sickness is a maim to us.
A perilous gash, a very limb lopp'd off.
And yet, in faith, it is not.
I rather of his absence make this use.
It lends a luster and more great opinion,
a larger dare to our great enterprise
than if the earl were here, for men must think,
if we without his help can make a head
to push against a kingdom, with his help,
we can o'erturn it topsy-turvy down.
Yet all goes well.
Yet all our joints are whole.
As heart can think.
There's not a word spoke of in Scotland
as this term of fear.
My cousin Vernon, welcome, by my soul.
Pray God my news be worth a welcome, lord.
The Earl of Westmoreland, seven thousand strong,
is marching hitherwards; with him, Prince John.
No harm. What more?
And further, I have learn'd,
the king himself in person is set forth,
or hitherwards intended speedily,
with strong and mighty preparation.
He shall be welcome too.
Where is his son,
the nimble-footed madcap Prince of Wales,
and his comrades that daff'd the world aside
and bid it pass?
All furnish'd, all in arms, all plumed like estridges
that with the wind baited like eagles having lately bathed,
glittering in golden coats like images,
as full of spirit as the month of May
and gorgeous as the sun at midsummer
wanton as youthful goats, wild as young bulls.
I saw young Harry with his beaver on,
his cuisses on his thighs, gallantly arm'd
rise from the ground like feather'd Mercury
and vaulted with such ease into his seat
as if an angel dropp'd down from the clouds
to turn and wind a fiery Pegasus
and witch the world with noble horsemanship.
No more, no more.
Worse than the sun in March, this praise doth nourish agues.
Let them come.
They come like sacrifices in their trim.
And to the fire-eyed maid of smoky war,
all hot and bleeding, shall we offer them.
The mailed Mars shall on his altar sit
up to the ears in blood.
I am on fire to hear this rich reprisal is so nigh
and yet not ours.
Come; let me taste my horse,
who is to bear me like a thunderbolt
against the bosom of the Prince of Wales.
Harry to Harry shall, hot horse to horse,
meet and ne'er part till one drop down a corse.
O that Glendower were come!
There is more news.
I learn'd in Worcester, as I rode along,
he cannot draw his power this fourteen days.
These are the worst tidings I hear of yet.
Ay, my faith, that bears a frosty sound.
What may the king's whole battle reach unto?
To thirty thousand.
Forty, let it be.
My father and Glendower being both away,
the powers of us may serve so great a day.
Come; let us take a muster speedily.
Doomsday is near.
Die all.
Die merrily.
Talk not of dying.
I'm out of fear of death or death's hand
this one-half year.
Bardolph, get thee before to Coventry.
Fill me a bottle of sack.
Our soldiers shall march through.
We'll to Sutton Co'fil' tonight.
Bardolph, bid my lieutenant Peto meet me at the town's end.
Will you give me money,captain?
Lay out. Lay out.
This bottle makes an angel.
An if it do, take it for thy labor.
And if it make twenty, take them all.
I'll answer the coinage.
I will, captain. Farewell!
Farewell.
If I be not ashamed of my soldiers,
I'm a soused gurnet.
I have misused the king's press damnably.
I have got, in exchange of a hundred and fifty soldiers,
three hundred and odd pound.
I press me none but good house-holders,
yeoman's sons,
inquire me out contracted bachelors
such as had been asked twice on the banns,
such a commodity of warm slaves
as had as lieve hear the devil as a drum,
such as fear the report of a caliver worse
than a struck fowl or a hurt wild-duck.
I pressed me none but such toasts-and-butter,
with hearts in their bellies no bigger than pins' heads,
and they...
have bought out their services.
And now my whole charge consists
of discarded unjust serving-men,
the younger sons of younger brothers,
revolted tapsters and ostlers trade-fallen,
the cankers of a calm world and a long peace.
Such have I, to fill up the rooms of them
that have bought out their services,
that you'd think that I had
a hundred and fifty tattered prodigals lately come
from swine-keeping, from eating draff and husks.
A mad fellow met me on the way and told me
I had unloaded all the gibbets and pressed the dead bodies.
No eye hath seen such scarecrows.
I'll not march through Coventry with them; that's flat.
How now, blown Jack!
What, Hal!
How now, mad wag!
What a devil dost thou in Warwickshire?
My Lord of Westmoreland, I cry your honor mercy.
I thought you had already been at Shrewsbury.
In faith, Sir John,
'tis more than time that I were there, and you too.
But my powers are there already.
The king, I can tell you, looks for us all.
We must away all night.
Tut, man, never fear me.
I'm as vigilant as a cat to steal cream.
I think to steal cream indeed,
for thy theft hath already made thee butter.
But tell me, Jack, whose fellows are these?
Mine, Hal, mine.
I did never see, such pitiful rascals.
Oh, tut, tut, man.
Good enough to toss.
Food for powder. Food for powder.
Well, they'll fill a pits as well as better.
Tush, man, mortal men, mortal men.
Ay, but, Sir John, methinks they are
exceeding poor and bare, too beggarly.
'Faith, for their poverty, I know not how they came by that.
And for their bareness,
I'm sure they never learned that of me.
No, I'll be sworn,
unless you call three fingers in the ribs bare.
Sirrah, make haste.
Percy is already in the field!
What, is the king encamped?
He is, Sir John.
I fear we shall stay too long!
Well, to the latter end of a fray
and the beginning of a feast
fits a dull fighter and a keen guest.
We'll fight with him tonight.
It may not be.
You give him then the advantage.
Not a whit.
Why say you so? Looks he not for supply?
So do we.
His is certain; ours is doubtful.
Good cousin, be advised; stir not tonight.
Do not, my lord.
You do not counsel well.
You speak it out of fear and cold heart.
Do me no slander, Douglas.
By my life, and I dare well maintain it with my life,
if well-respected honor prick me on,
I hold as little counsel with weak fear as you, my lord,
or any Scot that this day lives.
Let it be seen tomorrow in the battle which of us fears.
Yea, or tonight.
Content.
Tonight, say I.
Come, come. It may not be.
I do wonder much, being men of such great leading as you are,
that you foresee not what impediments
drag back our expedition.
Certain horse of my cousin Vernon's
are not yet come up.
Your uncle Worcester's horse came but today.
And now their pride and mettle is asleep,
their courage with hard labor tame and dull,
that not a horse is half the half of himself.
So are the horses of the enemy in general
journey-bated and brought low.
The better part of ours are full of rest.
The number of the king exceedeth ours.
For God's sake, cousin, stay till all come in.
I come with gracious offers from the king
if you vouchsafe me hearing and respect.
Welcome, Sir Walter Blunt.
And would to God you were of our determination.
Some of us love you well and even though some envy
your great deservings and good name,
because you're not of our quality
but stand against us like an enemy.
And God defend but still I should stand so,
so long as out of limit and true rule
you stand against anointed majesty.
But to my charge.
The king hath sent to know the nature of your griefs
and whereupon you conjure from the breast of civil peace
such bold hostility,
teaching his duteous land audacious cruelty.
If that the king have any way your just deserts forgot,
which he confesseth to be manifold,
he bids you name your griefs.
And with all speed, you shall have your desires
with interest and pardon absolute for yourself
and these herein misled by your suggestion.
The king is kind, and well we know the king knows
at what time to promise, when to pay.
My father and my uncle and myself did give him
that same royalty he wears.
And when he was not six and twenty strong,
sick in the world's regard, wretched and low,
a poor unminded outlaw sneaking home,
my father gave him welcome to the shore.
And when he heard him swear and vow to God
he came but to be Duke of Lancaster,
to sue his livery and beg his peace
with tears of innocency and terms of zeal,
my father, in kind heart and pity moved,
swore him assistance and perform'd it too.
And when the lords and barons of the realm
perceived Northumberland did lean to him,
the more and less came in with cap and knee,
met him in boroughs, cities, villages,
attended him on bridges, stood in lanes,
laid gifts before him, proffer'd him their oaths,
gave him their heirs, as pages follow'd him
even at the heels in golden multitudes.
He presently,as greatness knows itself,
steps me a little higher than his vow made to my father,
while his blood was poor,
upon the naked shore at Ravenspurgh
and now, forsooth, takes on him to reform
some certain edicts and some strait decrees
that lie too heavy on the commonwealth,
cries out upon abuses,
seems to weep over his country's wrongs,
and by this face, this seeming brow of justice,
did he win the hearts of all that he did angle for.
Proceeded further; cuts me off the heads
of all the favorites that the absent king
in deputation left behind him here
while he was personal in the Irish wars.
Tut!
I came not to hear this.
Then to the point.
In short time after, he deposed the king;
soon after that, deprived him of his life;
and, in the neck of that, task'd the whole state.
To make that worse, suffer'd his kinsman Mortimer,
who is, if every owner were well placed,
indeed his king, to be engaged in Wales,
there without ransom to lie forfeited;
disgraced me in my happy victories;
sought to entrap me by intelligence;
rated mine uncle from the council-board;
in rage, dismiss'd my father from the court;
broke oath on oath; committed wrong on wrong;
and, in conclusion,
drove us to seek out this head of safety
and withal to pry into his title,
the which we find too indirect for long continuance.
Shall I return this answer to the king?
Not so, Sir Walter.
We'll withdraw a while.
Go to the king.
Let there be impawn'd some surety for a safe return again,
and in the morning earl
shall mine uncle bring him our purposes.
And so farewell.
I would you would accept of grace and love.
And may be so we shall.
Pray God you do.
Hie, good Sir Michael.
Bear this sealed brief with winged haste
to the lord marshal, this to my cousin Scroop,
and all the rest to whom they are directed.
If you knew how much they do to import,
you would make haste.
My good lord, I do guess their tenor.
Like enough you do.
Tomorrow, good Sir Michael, is a day
wherein the fortune of ten thousand men
must bide the touch.
For, sir, at Shrewsbury,
as I am truly given to understand,
the king, with mighty and quick-raised power,
meets with Lord Harry.
And, I fear, Sir Michael,
what with the sickness of Northumberland,
whose power was in the first proportion,
and what with Owen Glendower's absence thence,
who with them was a rated sinew too
and comes not in, o'er-ruled by prophecies,
I fear the power of Percy is too weak
to wage an instant trial with the king.
Doubt not, my lord; they shall be well opposed.
I hope no less.
Yet needful 'tis to fear.
And, to prevent the worst, Sir Michael, speed,
for if Lord Percy thrive not, ere the king dismiss his power,
he means to visit us,
for he hath heard of our confederacy,
and 'tis but wisdom to make strong against him.
Therefore, make haste.
I must go write again to other friends.
So farewell, Sir Michael.
How bloodily the sun begins to peer above yon busky hill.
The day looks pale at his distemperature.
The southern wind doth play the trumpet to his purposes,
and, by his hollow whistling in the leaves,
foretells a tempest and a blustering day.
Then with the losers let it sympathize,
for nothing can seem foul to those that win.
How now, my Lord of Worcester.
'Tis not well that you and I should meet
upon such terms as now we meet.
You have deceived our trust
and made us doff our easy robes of peace
to crush our old limbs in ungentle steel.
This is not well, my lord.
This is not well.
What say you to it?
Will you again unknit this churlish knot
of all-abhorred war
And move in that obedient orb again
where you did give a fair and natural light
and be no more an exhaled meteor,
a prodigy of fear and a portent of mischief
to the unborn times?
Hear me, my liege.
For mine own part, I could be well content
to entertain the lag-end of my life with quiet hours,
for I protest,
I have not sought the day of this dislike.
You have not sought it?
How comes it, then?
Rebellion lay in his way, and he found it.
Peace, chewet, peace!
It pleased your majesty to turn your looks of favor
from myself and all our house.
And yet I must remember you, my lord,
we were the first and dearest of your friends.
For you, my staff of office did I break In Richard's time
and posted day and night to meet you on the way
and kiss your hand,
while yet you were in place and in account
nothing so strong and fortunate as I.
It was myself, my brother, and his son
who brought you home
and boldly did outdare the dangers of the time.
And being fed by us, you used us so
as that ungentle gull, the cuckoo's bird,
useth the sparrow: did oppress our nest,
grew by our feeding to so great a bulk
that even our love durst not come near your sight
for fear of swallowing.
But with nimble wing, we were enforced,
for safety sake, to fly out of your sight
and raise this present head,
whereby we stand opposed by such means
as you yourself have forged against yourself
by unkind usage, dangerous countenance,
and violation of all faith and troth
sworn to us in your younger enterprise!
These things indeed you have articulate,
proclaim'd at market-crosses, read in churches,
to face the garment of rebellion with some fine color
that may please the eye
of fickle changelings and poor discontents,
which gape and rub the elbow at the news
o hurlyburly innovation.
And never yet did insurrection want
such water-colors to impaint his cause,
nor moody beggars, starving for a time
of pellmell havoc and confusion.
In both our armies, there is many a soul
shall pay full dearly for this encounter
if once they join in trial.
Tell your nephew the Prince of Wales
doth join with all the world in praise of Henry Percy.
By my hopes, this present enterprise set off his head,
I do not think a braver gentleman,
more active-valiant or more valiant-young,
more daring or more bold, is now alive
to grace this latter age with noble deeds.
For my part, I may speak it to my shame,
I have a truant been to chivalry,
and so I hear he doth account me too.
Yet this before my father's majesty.
I am content that he shall take the odds
of his great name and estimation
and will, to save the blood on either side,
try fortune with him in a single fight.
And, Prince of Wales, so dare we venture thee,
albeit considerations infinite do make against it.
No, good Worcester, no.
We love our people well.
Even those we love
that are misled upon your cousin's part.
And, will they take the offer of our grace,
both he and they and you,yea, every man,
shall be my friend again and I'll be his.
So tell your cousin,
and bring me word what he will do.
But if he will not yield,
rebuke and dread correction wait on us,
and they shall do their office.
So be gone.
We will not now be troubled with reply.
We offer fair.
Take it advisedly.
It will not be accepted, on my life.
The Douglas and the Hotspur both together
are confident against the world in arms.
Hence, therefore, every leader to his charge,
for, on their answer, will we set on them.
And God befriend us,as our cause is just!
Hal, if thou see me down in the battle and bestride me, so.
'Tis a point of friendship.
Nothing but a colossus can do thee that friendship.
Say thy prayers, and farewell.
I--
I would 'twere bed-time, Hal, and all well.
Why, thou owest God a death.
'Tis not due yet!
I would be loath to pay him before his day.
What need I be so forward with him that calls not on me?
Well, 'tis no matter; honor pricks me on.
Yea, but how if honor prick me off when I come on?
How then?
Can honor set to a leg?
No, or an arm?
No, or take away the grief of a wound?
No.
Honor hath then no skill in surgery?
What is honor?
A word.
What is in that word "honor"?
What is that honor?
Air.
A trim reckoning.
Who hath it?
He that died o' Wednesday.
Doth he feel it?
No.
Doth he hear it?
'Tis insensible, then
Yea, to the dead.
But will it not live with the living?
No.
Why?
Detraction will not suffer it.
Therefore, I'll none of it.
Honor is a mere scutcheon.
And so ends my catechism.
O, no, Sir Richard, my nephew must not know
the liberal and kind offer of the king.
'Twere best he did.
Then are we all undone.
It is not possible, it cannot be,
the king should keep his word in loving us.
He will suspect us still and find a time
to punish this offense in other faults.
Therefore, dear cousin, let not Harry know,
in any case, the offer of the king.
Deliver what you will; I'll say 'tis so.
My uncle is return'd.
Deliver up my Lord of Westmoreland.
Uncle, what news?
The king will bid you battle presently.
Defy him by the Lord of Westmoreland.
Lord Douglas, go you and tell him so.
Marry, I shall, and very willingly.
There's no seeming mercy in the king.
Did you beg any?
God forbid.
I told him gently of our grievances,
of his oath-breaking, which he mended thus
by now forswearing that he is forsworn.
He calls us rebels, traitors,
will purge with haughty arms this hateful name in us.
Arm, gentlemen; to arms.
I have thrown a brave defiance in King Harry's teeth,
and Westmoreland, that was engaged, did bear it.
This cannot choose but bring him quickly on.
The Prince of Wales stepp'd forth before the king
and, nephew, challenged you to single fight.
Oh, would to God the quarrel lay upon our heads
and that no man might draw short breath today
but I and Harry Monmouth.
Tell me, tell me, how show'd his tasking?
Seem'd it in contempt?
No, by my soul, I never in my life
did hear a challenge urged more modestly,
unless a brother should a brother dare
to gentle exercise and proof of arms.
He gave you all the virtues of a man,
trimm'd up your praises with a princely tongue,
spoke to your deserving like a chronicle,
making you ever better than his praise
by still dispraising praise valued with you.
And, which became him like a prince indeed,
he made a blushing cital of himself
and chid his truant youth with such a grace
as if he master'd there a double spirit,
of teaching and of learning instantly.
There did he pause.
But let me tell the world,
if he outlive the envy of this day,
England did never own so sweet a hope,
so much misconstrued in his wantonness.
Cousin, I think thou art enamored of his follies.
Never did I hear of any prince so wild a libertine.
But be he as he will, yet once ere night
I will embrace him with a soldier's arm
that he shall shrink under my courtesy.
Arm, arm with speed.
And, fellows, soldiers, friends,
better consider what you have to do than I,
that have not well the gift of tongue,
can lift your blood up with persuasion.
My lord, here are letters for you.
I cannot read them now.
Oh, gentlemen, the time of life is short.
To spend that shortness basely were too long,
if life did ride upon a dial's point,
still ending at the arrival of an hour.
An if we live, we live to tread on kings;
if die, brave death, when princes die with us.
Now, for our consciences, the arms are fair
when the intent of bearing them is just.
My lord, prepare.
The king comes on apace.
I thank him that he cuts me from my tale,
for I profess not talking, only this:
let each man do his best.
And here draw I a sword, whose temper I intend to stain
with the best blood that I can meet withal
in the adventure of this perilous day.
Now, Esperance.
Percy.
And set on.
Sound all the lofty instruments of war,
and, by that music, let us all embrace.
For, heaven to earth, some of us never shall
a second time do such a courtesy.
What is thy name,
that in this battle thus thou crossest me?
What honors dost thou seek upon my head?
Know then, my name is Douglas;
and I do haunt thee in battle thus
because some tell me thou art a king.
They tell thee true.
My Lord of Stafford dear today hath bought thy likeness,
for instead of thee, King Harry, this sword has ended him,
which shall it thee,
unless thou yield thee as my prisoner.
I was not born a yielder, thou proud Scot,
and thou shalt find a king
that will revenge Lord Stafford's death.
Ohm Douglas, hadst thou fought at Holmedon thus,
never had triumph'd upon a Scot.
All's done. All's won.
See; here, breathless lies the king.
Where?
Here.
This, Douglas?
No, I know this face full well.
A gallant knight he was.
His name was Blunt.
Semblably furnish'd like the king himself.
A fool go with thy soul, whither it will.
A borrow'd title hast thou bought too dear.
Why didst thou tell me thou wert a king?
The king has many marching in his coats.
Then, by my sword, I will kill all his coats.
I'll murder all his wardrobe, piece by piece,
until I find the king.
Up, and away!
Our soldiers stand full fairly for the day!
This way! Follow me!
Follow him, lads!
Come on! Hurry!
Come on, men!
Though I could 'scape shot-free at London,
yet I fear the shot here.
Here's no scoring but upon the pate.
Soft!
Who are you?
Sir Walter Blunt.
There's honor for you.
I'm as hot as molten lead and as heavy.
God keep lead out of me!
I need no more weight than mine own bowels.
I have led my ragamuffins where they are peppered.
There's not three of my hundred and fifty left alive.
And they are for the town's end, to beg during life.
But who comes here?
What?
Stand'st thou idle here?
Lend me thy sword.
Many a nobleman lies stark and stiff
under the hoofs of vaunting enemies,
whose deaths are yet unrevenged.
I prithee, lend me thy sword!
Oh, Hal, I prithee, give me leave to breathe awhile.
Turk Gregory never did such deeds in arms
as I have done this day.
I have paid Percy. I have made him sure.
He is, indeed, and living to kill thee.
I prithee, lend me thy sword!
Nay, before God, Hal, if Percy be alive,
thou get'st not my sword.
Take my pistol, if thou wilt.
Give it to me.
What, is it in the case?
Ay, 'tis hot. 'Tis hot.
There's that will sack a city.
What?
Is it a time to jest and dally now?
Well, if Percy be alive, I'll pierce him.
If he do come in my way, so.
If he do not, if I come in his willingly,
let him make a carbonado of me.
I like not such grinning honor as Sir Walter hath.
Give me life, which, if I can save, so.
If not, honor comes unlooked for,
and there's an end.
This way! Follow me!
I prithee, Harry, withdraw thyself.
Thou bleed'st too much.
Lord John of Lancaster, go you with him.
Not I, my lord, unless I did bleed too.
I do beseech your majesty, make up,
lest your retirement do amaze your friends.
I will do so.
My Lord of Westmoreland, go you with him.
Come, come, my lord; I'll lead you to your tent.
Lead me, my lord?
I do not need your help.
And God forbid a shallow scratch should drive the Prince of Wales
from such a field as this,
where stain'd nobility lies trodden on
and rebels' arms triumph in massacres.
We breathe too long.
Come, cousin Westmoreland.
Our duty this way lies.
For God's sake, come.
By God, thou hast deceived me, Lancaster.
I did not think thee lord of such a spirit.
Before, I loved thee as a brother, John.
Now I do respect thee as my soul.
I saw him hold Lord Percy at the point
with lustier maintenance than I did look for
of such an ungrown warrior.
Oh, this boy lends mettle to us all.
Another king.
They grow like Hydra's heads.
I am the Douglas, fatal to all those
that wear those colors on them.
Who art thou that counterfeit'st the person of a king?
The king himself, who, Douglas,
grieves at heart so many of his shadows
thou hast met and not the very king.
I have two boys seek Percy and thyself about the field.
But, seeing thou fall'st on me so luckily,
I will assay thee, so defend thyself.
I fear thou art another counterfeit.
Yet thou bear'st thee like a king.
But mine thou art, whoe'er thou be,
and thus I win thee.
Hold up thy head, vile Scot,
or thou art like never to hold it up again,
The spirits of valiant Shirley, Stafford, Blunt, are in my arms.
It is the Prince of Wales that threatens thee,
who never promiseth but he means to pay.
Cheerly, my lord, how fares your grace?
Sir Nicholas Gawsey hath for succor sent,
and so hath Clifton.
I'll to Clifton straight.
Stay, and breathe awhile.
Thou hast redeem'd thy lost opinion
and show'd thou makest some tender of my life
in this fair rescue thou hast brought to me.
O God!
They did me too much injury
that ever said I hearken'd for your death.
If it were so, I might have let alone
the insulting hand of Douglas over you,
which would have been as speedy in your end
as all the poisonous potions in the world
and saved the treacherous labor of your son!
Make up to Clifton.
I'll to Sir Nicholas Gawsey.
If I mistake not, thou art Harry Monmouth.
Thou speak'st as if I would deny my name.
My name is Harry Percy.
Why, then I see a very valiant rebel of the name.
I am the Prince of Wales, and think not, Percy,
to share with me in glory any more.
Two stars keep not their motion in one sphere,
nor can one England brook a double reign
of Harry Percy and the Prince of Wales.
Nor shall it, Harry,
for the hour is come to end the one of us.
And would to God thy name in arms were now
as great as mine.
I'll make it greater ere I part from thee,
and all the budding honors on thy crest I'll crop
to make a garland for my head.
I can no longer brook thy vanities.
Oh!
Well said, Hal!
To it, Hal!
Nay, you shall find no boy's play here,
I can tell you.
Oh, Harry, thou hast robb'd me of my youth.
I better brook the loss of brittle life
than those proud titles thou hast won of me.
They wound my thoughts worse than thy sword my flesh.
But thoughts the slaves of life, and life time's fool.
And time itself, that takes survey of all the world,
must have a stop.
Oh, I could prophesy,
but that the earthy and co--
cold hand of death lies on my tongue.
No, Percy, thou art dust and food for--
For worms, brave Percy.
Fare thee well, great heart.
Ill-weaved ambition, how much art thou shrunk.
When that this body did contain a spirit,
a kingdom for it was too small a bound.
But now two paces of the vilest earth
is room enough.
This earth that bears thee dead
bears not alive so stout a gentleman.
If thou wert sensible of courtesy,
I should not make so dear a show of zeal.
But let my favors hide thy mangled face.
And, even in thy behalf, I'll thank myself
for doing these fair rites of tenderness.
Adieu, and take thy praise with thee to heaven.
Thy ignominy sleep with thee in the grave
but not remember'd in thy epitaph.
What, old acquaintance?
Could not all this flesh keep in a little life?
Poor Jack, farewell.
I could have better spared a better man.
Oh, I should have a heavy miss of thee
if I were much in love with vanity.
Death hath not struck so fat a deer today,
though many dearer, in this bloody fray.
Embowell'd will I see thee by and by.
Till then, in blood by noble Percy lie.
Embowelled?
If thou embowel me to-day,
I'll give you leave to powder me and eat me too tomorrow.
'Sblood, twas time to counterfeit,
or that hot termagant Scot had paid me scot and lot too.
Counterfeit?
I lie; I am no counterfeit.
To die is to be a counterfeit,
for he is but the counterfeit of a man
who hath not the life of a man.
But to counterfeit dying when a man thereby liveth
is to be no counterfeit
but the true and perfect image of life indeed.
The better part of valor is discretion,
in the which better part I have saved my life.
'Zounds, I'm afraid of this gunpowder Percy,
though he be dead.
How, if he should counterfeit too and rise?
By my faith, I'm afraid
he'd prove the better counterfeit.
Therefore I'll make him sure.
Yea, and I'll swear I killed him.
Why may not he rise as well as I?
Nothing confutes me but eyes, and nobody sees me.
Therefore, sirrah...
with a new wound in your thigh, come you along with me.
Come, brother John.
Full bravely hast thou flesh'd thy maiden sword.
But soft.
Whom have we here?
Did you not tell me this fat man was dead?
I did.
I saw him dead.
Breathless and bleeding on the ground.
Art thou alive?
Or is it some fantasy that plays upon our eyesight?
I prithee, speak.
We will not trust our eyes without our ears.
Thou art not what thou seem'st.
No, that's certain.
I am no double man.
But if I be not Jack Falstaff, then am I a Jack.
There is Percy.
If your father will do me any honor, so.
If not, let him kill the next Percy himself.
I look to be either earl or duke,
I can assure you.
Percy I killed myself and saw thee dead.
Didst thou?
Lord, Lord, how this world is given to lying.
I grant, I was down and out of breath,
and so was he.
But we rose both at an instant
and fought a long hour by Shrewsbury clock.
If I may be believed, so.
If not, let them that should reward valor
take the sin upon their own heads.
I'll take it upon my death,
I gave him this wound in the thigh.
If the man were alive and would deny it,
'zounds, I'd make him eat a piece of my sword.
This is the strangest tale that ever I heard.
It is the strangest fellow, brother John.
Come; bring your luggage nobly on your back.
If a lie may do thee grace,
I'll gild it with the happiest terms I have.
The trumpet sounds retreat.
The day is ours.
Come, brother; let us to the highest of the field
to see what friends are living, who are dead.
I'll follow, as they say, for reward.
He that rewards me, God reward him.
If I do grow great, I'll grow less,
for I'll purge and leave sack
and live cleanly as a nobleman should do.
Thus ever did rebellion find rebuke.
Ill-spirited Worcester.
Did not we send grace, pardon, and terms of love to all of you?
And wouldst thou turn our offers contrary,
misuse the tenor of thy kinsman's trust?
Three knights upon our party slain today,
a noble earl and many a creature else
had been alive this hour if, like a Christian,
thou hadst truly borne betwixt our armies
true intelligence.
What I have done, my safety urged me to,
and I embrace my fortune patiently,
since not to be avoided it falls on me.
Bear Worcester to the death and Vernon too.
Other offenders, we will pause upon.
How goes the field?
The noble Scot, Lord Douglas, when he saw
the fortune of the day quite turn'd from him,
the noble Percy slain,
and all his men upon the foot of fear,
fled with the rest.
Falling from a hill,
he was so bruised that the pursuers took him.
At my tent, the Douglas is,
and I beseech your grace I may dispose of him.
With all my heart.
Brother John of Lancaster, to you,
this honorable bounty shall belong.
Go to the Douglas,
deliver him up to his pleasure, ransomless and free.
His valor shown upon our crests today
hath taught us how to cherish such high deeds
even in the bosom of our adversaries.
I thank your grace for this high courtesy,
which I shall give away immediately.
Then this remains: that we divide our power.
You, son John, and my cousin Westmoreland
towards York shall bend you with your dearest speed
to meet Northumberland and the prelate Scroop,
who, as we hear, are busily in arms.
Myself and you, son Harry, will towards Wales
to fight with Glendower and the Earl of March.
Rebellion in this land shall lose his sway,
meeting the cheque of such another day.
And since this business so fair is done,
let us not leave till all our own be won.